'black panther': 3 final box office milestones it may yet conquer
share
trending
media & entertainment
#boxoffice
media & entertainment
#boxoffice
apr 13, 2018 @ 01:00 pm
'black panther': 3 final box office milestones it may yet conquer
share to email
share to facebook
share to twitter
share to linkedin
share to google
most read
scott mendelson
,
contributor
i cover the film industry.
opinions expressed by forbes contributors are their own.
walt disney
'black panther'
this may be the end of the line for these daily black panther updates. the film is winding down but, more importantly, only has a few more milestones to go for. we'll find out this weekend how much gas is left in the tank for the ryan coogler-directed mcu flick, and since we're two weeks out from avengers: infinity war, i suppose this will be as good a place as any to wrap this up. although, depending on how well it does over the weekend, i might do a final summation on monday. but either way, with $668 million domestic and over  $1.3 billion worldwide, the chadwick boseman flick is mostly done breaking records. it has only three real milestones left to achieve, and two of them are the kind of trivial bits that only box office nerds like me care about. so, without further ado, here are the three final possible box office milestones that are still within reach.
passing star wars: the last jedi at the global box office
with around $1.305 billion worldwide heading into the weekend, we'll find out by sunday whether the film has enough juice left to get that $27.8 million needed to pass star wars: the last jedi ($1.332.7b) and become the ninth-biggest global grosser in the world. at this point, it's a coin toss, as it's slowing down overseas faster than it is in north america. the $1.341.5b gross of harry potter and the deathly hallows part ii is likely out of reach, but getting past the last star wars movie will allow black panther to stay in the top 10 even if avengers: infinity war crushes it in two weeks.
of course, miraculously getting past harry potter 7.2 will allow it to remain in the top 10 even if avengers and jurassic world: fallen kingdom do best-case scenario box office, but these are minor quibbles when you're at this level of success. and, as i noted yesterday, it may not be in walt disney's best interest for black panther to pass last jed, since it may merely fuel the whole "egad, star wars is in trouble" narrative that began when last jedi merely made most of the money instead of all the money. but, again, this is a minor quibble when you're dealing with these kinds of numbers and when most of the movies we're discussing came from the same studio.
how high will it get on the inflation-adjusted list?
yes, black panther's current rank as the third-biggest domestic earner of all time is partially due to inflation and various upcharges (3d, imax, d-box) that mostly didn't exist until a decade ago. conversely, theatrical movies didn't have to fight youtube, netflix, vod, dvd and "peak tv" when seeking the time and money of general consumers. no matter, black panther is currently 33rd on the inflation-adjusted list, between sleeping beauty ($667m adjusted) and the jungle book ($676m adjusted). if it makes it to $686.7m, it'll pass the dark knight to become the second-biggest comic book superhero movie of all time (behind the avengers) and it'll pass thunderball ($65m in 1965/$686.6m adjusted) to be bigger than any 007 flick.
oh, and it'll end its run as the 30th-biggest inflation-adjusted grosser of all time. no, i don't think it can catch the avengers ($623 million in 2012/$706m adjusted), but getting past the dark knight will make it the biggest inflation-adjusted solo superhero flick of all time. moreover, it'll be the 11th-highest-grossing movie in terms of tickets sold over the last 35 years, behind only the avengers, forrest gump, jurassic world, the lion king, star wars episode one: the phantom menace, jurassic park, return of the jedi, avatar, star wars: the force awakens and titanic. so, yeah, inflation or not, that'll be pretty damn impressive.
how high will it get on the leggiest $100 million+ openers list
right now, with $668 million from a $202m fri-sun debut, black panther is the 13th-leggiest movie ever to snag an opening weekend above $100m in its fri-sun debut. no, that's not accounting for inflation (there's 50 $100m+ openers but 93 if you account for inflation), but legs and legs no matter the ticket price. and in raw grosses, it is the 13th-leggiest $100m+ opener, behind only the dark knight (30% of its total via its debut weekend), rogue one (29%), revenge of the sith (28%), the jungle book (28%), spider-man (28%), the secret life of pets (28%), finding dory (27%), transformers: revenge of the fallen (27%), toy story 3 (26%), the force awakens (26%), wonder woman (25%) and shrek 2 (24%). three of those (shrek 2, transformers 2 and star wars 3) opened on a thursday or wednesday.
other than that, it's pretty much a done deal. it isn't passing avatar on the domestic grossers list, it isn't going to get much higher than 30th place on the inflation-adjusted list, and it won't get much higher than 12th or 11th place on the "leggiest $100m+ grossers" list. it's been a hell of a run, under two months in fact. now the only thing left is to tally up the bucks and wait for it to eventually fall behind avatar in the day-to-day grosses and thus take its place as the third-fastest grossing movie of all time. anything else will be up to black panther 2.
if you like what you're reading, follow @scottmendelson on twitter, and "like" the ticket booth on facebook. also, check out my archives for older work here.
share to email
share to facebook
share to twitter
share to linkedin
share to google
print
website feedback
news tip
report corrections
reprints & permissions