trump mocked for 'mission accomplished!' tweet - cnnpoliticsbreaking news45congresssecuritythe ninetrumpmerica2018search »trump mocked for 'mission accomplished!' tweetby dakin andone and lindsay benson, cnnupdated 11:51 am et, sat april 14, 2018 chat with us in facebook messenger. find out what's happening in the world as it unfolds.just watchedtrump on strikes: 'mission accomplished!' replaymore videos ...must watchtrump on strikes: 'mission accomplished!'
00:46 (cnn)the twittersphere piled on president donald trump after he tweeted saturday that the us-led strikes on syria "could not have had a better result." "mission accomplished!" he wrote of the us, uk and french strikes against targets in syria over the suspected use of chemical weapons.a perfectly executed strike last night. thank you to france and the united kingdom for their wisdom and the power of their fine military. could not have had a better result. mission accomplished!— donald j. trump (@realdonaldtrump) april 14, 2018
what we know about the syria strikestwitter users immediately saw a connection to comments from president george w. bush in 2003 when he gave a speech announcing an end to major combat operations in iraq with a massive banner behind him that read, "mission accomplished." george w. bush later came to regret the "mission accomplished" banner.bush gave his speech aboard the uss abraham lincoln aircraft carrier a little more than a month after us troops were deployed to iraq, and it would soon become clear that the mission was, in fact, not accomplished. as the war dragged on, it came to symbolize what had gone wrong in iraq. read morebush later told cnn the banner was a mistake. "it was a sign aimed at the sailors on the ship, but it conveyed a broader knowledge," he said in 2008. "to some it said, well, bush thinks the war in iraq is over, when i didn't think that. but nonetheless, it conveyed the wrong message." here's how twitter responded"i didn't think i could be shocked by a tweet anymore but 'mission accomplished' was so surprising i had to double check that it was not a spoof," us sen. brian schatz, d-hawaii, wrote. i didn't think i could be shocked by a tweet anymore but "mission accomplished" was so surprising i had to double check that it was not a spoof.— brian schatz (@brianschatz) april 14, 2018
ari fleischer, white house press secretary under bush, responded to trump's tweet, writing, "um...i would have recommended ending this tweet with not those two words." fleischer went on to describe the back story of the banner. um...i would have recommended ending this tweet with not those two words. https://t.co/h5fl7kjea6— ari fleischer (@arifleischer) april 14, 2018
msnbc host joy-ann reid tweeted, "saying 'mission accomplished' always works out well for presidents."saying "mission accomplished" always works out well for presidents ... https://t.co/fbf8tcnt04— joy reid (@joyannreid) april 14, 2018
mike levin, a democratic candidate for california's 49th congressional district, also criticized trump's move. "even george w. bush, who almost never admitted mistakes, said using that term was a bad decision." trump just said "mission accomplished" on syria?even george w. bush, who almost never admitted mistakes, said using that term was a bad decision.
congress needs to step up and minimize the chance that @realdonaldtrump similarly regrets his rhetoric.— mike levin (@mikelevinca) april 14, 2018
"mission accomplished???" wrote jim roberts, editor-in-chief of streaming news network cheddar. mission accomplished??? is there anyone in the white house with an understanding of history? pic.twitter.com/pfodhcmzag— jim roberts (@nycjim) april 14, 2018
"is there anyone in the white house with an understanding of history?" he asked.content by lendingtreeexperts are urging americans to refinance in 2018
pay off your house with this insane trick
how much could you save by refinancing?
rates now at 3.75% apr - $225k mortgage for $1,636/mo
crush your debt: refinance to a 15 yr fixed
paid partner contentmyfinancetwo savings accounts that pay 10 times what your bank pays
bankratecd rates skyrocket - lock in your rate today myfinancehow to 10x your savings with these new accounts the motley fool$19.9 trillion idea hidden in plain sight the motley fool7 in 10 americans could miss out on this $8.7t opportunity 45congresssecuritythe ninetrumpmerica2018© 2018 cable news network. turner broadcasting system, inc. all rights reserved. cnn sans ™ & © 2016 cable news network.terms of service | privacy guidelines | adchoices