syrian chemical attack survivor to trump: i want to 'buy you a beer'
- cnnpoliticsbreaking news45congresssecuritythe ninetrumpmerica2018search »syrian chemical attack survivor to trump: i want to 'buy you a beer' by clare foran, cnnupdated 8:14 pm et, sat april 14, 2018 chat with us in facebook messenger. find out what's happening in the world as it unfolds.just watchedrefugee: i want to tell trump how bad syria isreplaymore videos ...must watch (17 videos)refugee: i want to tell trump how bad syria iswhat exactly happened with the syria strikes?haley: us locked and loaded if syria uses gas againhow the us launched syria strike missionpence: syria airstrikes a morally right acttrump on strikes: 'mission accomplished!' pentagon says they hit every target in syria first look at damage on the ground in syriasee missiles fly through damascus skytrump: these are crimes of a monstermattis: assad didn't get the message last yearofficial: us response to syria is not overvideo reportedly shows airstrike in syriatrump's message to iran and russiacolumnist: unlikely assad will give up weaponstimeline of the us precision strikes on syriatheresa may's statement on airstrikes in syriawashington (cnn)a survivor of a syrian chemical attack in 2013 wants to buy president donald trump a beer to share his experience on the conditions in the country.kassem eid, who told cnn's ana cabrera he lived under two years of siege and bombardment by the syrian government, said he was glad the president has attempted to do something for the syrian people."i just want to tell mr. trump directly: i'm a syrian refugee who survived chemical weapons attacks, who lived under two years of siege and bombardment by the government," eid said. "i would love to, like, buy you a beer, and just sit in front of you and tell you how bad it is in syria." eid also said he would tell trump, that he "proved once again, yesterday, that you have a big heart. at least a lot more bigger than obama because you actually tried to do something. we need real, long-term commitment to bring peace to syria."the united states, along with the united kingdom and france, launched coordinated air strikes friday evening on syria's chemical weapons capabilities in response to an alleged chemical attack. in a speech announcing the attack, trump blamed the regime of syrian president bashar al-assad. read moreon saturday, trump called the strike "perfectly executed," on twitter, writing, "mission accomplished!" the syrian government has denied involvement in the chemical attack. "trump, i'll buy you a beer" -- kassem eid, a survivor of 2013 chemical weapons attack in syria following missile strikes by u.s., u.k. and france.https://t.co/ufb1jcvk66— ana cabrera (@anacabrera) april 14, 2018
in august 2013, then-president barack obama said the us had determined that syria had launched a chemical weapons attack targeting its own people. obama opted to seek congressional approval over the use of military force in syria. but as cnn has reported, "when obama considered launching airstrikes in syria against 2013, he decided to go to congress before striking, and the resistance he faced there convinced the president not to hit assad." in 2014, obama did announce a series of airstrikes against what the president described as "isil targets in syria," using an alternate term for the terrorist group more commonly known as isis. trump launched a military strike against the syrian regime nearly one year ago targeting a government airbase also in response to a chemical weapons attack that killed civilians. content by lendingtreeexperts are urging americans to refinance in 2018
pay off your house with this insane trick
how much could you save by refinancing?
rates now at 3.75% apr - $225k mortgage for $1,636/mo
crush your debt: refinance to a 15 yr fixed
paid partner contentmyfinancetwo savings accounts that pay 10 times what your bank pays
bankratecd rates skyrocket - lock in your rate today myfinancehow to 10x your savings with these new accounts the motley fool$19.9 trillion idea hidden in plain sight the motley fool7 in 10 americans could miss out on this $8.7t opportunity 45congresssecuritythe ninetrumpmerica2018© 2018 cable news network. turner broadcasting system, inc. all rights reserved. cnn sans ™ & © 2016 cable news network.terms of service | privacy guidelines | adchoices